Statistics and Bioinformatics Assignment 2019
Assessment 1

Introduction

You have been allocated two unique datasets to analyse. To find yours, look at the table at the end of this document. Your datasets are supplied as tab-delimited text files. Having read the description of the way the data were collected, you need to import each dataset into R. Remember to check the datasets when you import them for things like proper allocation of each variable as a factor or a numeric variable etc, and to carry out proper exploratory data analysis. Once you're happy that you've got the data into a condition where it can be analysed, fit a model and use that to try to answer the questions given below. For each dataset, your writeup should consist of a properly annotated R script that will allow me to exactly replicate your analysis, and the results section of a paper describing your findings. The latter should be no more than 800 words for exercises 1 and 2 (and can be a lot less...) and should not contain any unnecessary figures or tables: I would recommend no more than two figures. If in doubt have a look at some papers in (for example) Proceedings B or Molecular Ecology to see how it's done. Please don’t paste output from R directly into your report, by which I mean don’t just paste a summary table or an ANOVA table in, not that you shouldn’t use graphics from R.

Probiotics and synbiotics 

Complex communities of microbiota colonise the human gastrointestinal tract and play an important part in human health. The intestinal microbiota is essential for immune function, digestion, and metabolic processes. Examples of immune function by the gastrointestinal microbiota include the production of antimicrobial peptides and bacteriocins.
When antibiotics are administered to treat an infection, this often has unintended negative consequences for commensal or beneficial microorganisms in the gastrointestinal system (perturbation of the gastrointestinal microbiota is known as “dysbiosis”). The functions of the gastrointestinal microbiota are particularly affected in elderly patients. Some recent work, however, suggests that the administration of probiotics can help recover human gastrointestinal microbiota. A number of different bacterial strains have been investigated for inclusion in probiotics, and multispecies probiotics are being developed where bacterial strains have an additive or synergistic effect on each other. The effect of probiotics can be enhanced by adding non-digestible food material (such as high fibre) to the diet. A treatment consisting of a combination of probiotics and dietary fibre is known as a synbiotic. 
In Investigation 1 (dataset1), 80 hospitalised patients (age range 70-81 years) suffering from gastrointestinal infections were treated with antibiotics. Patients ranged in the severity of symptoms before treatment, which was recorded as the number of days with diarrhoea and vomiting pre-treatment. 40 patients were administered with a multispecies probiotic treatment (consisting of combined bacterial strains Lactobacillus rhamnosus and Bifidobacterium lactis). The other patients received a placebo. After five days of treatment, five intestinal mucus samples were taken per patient during an intestinal endoscopy to monitor recovery of the gastrointestinal microbiota. The amount of antimicrobial peptides within the mucus was measured using flow cytometry and an average value (mg/ml) was calculated per patient. 
1)	How is the severity of infection related to the production of antimicrobial peptides by the human gastrointestinal microbiota? Is this relationship dependent on the administration of probiotics and if so, how?

In Investigation 2 (dataset2), a follow-up study was conducted to measure the effects of synbiotics on the diversity of gastrointestinal microbiota following treatment with antibiotics after gastrointestinal infection. A fully factorial design was implemented to test the effect of probiotics in combination with high dietary fibre using 120 patients. After ten days on the treatment, two stool samples were taken per patient with 6 replicates each. Deep amplicon sequencing of the V4 region of the 16S marker gene was performed using Illumina MiSeq 350bp technology. Shannon diversity was calculated on Amplicon Sequencing Variants and an average value was calculated per patient. 
2)	What are the effects of probiotics and diet on Shannon diversity of recovered gastrointestinal microbiota?

