Statistics and Bioinformatics Assignment 2019
Assessment 2

Introduction

You have been allocated two unique datasets to analyse. To find yours, look at the table at the end of this document. Your datasets are supplied as tab-delimited text files. Having read the description of the way the data were collected, you need to import each dataset into R. Remember to check the datasets when you import them for things like proper allocation of each variable as a factor or a numeric variable etc, and to carry out proper exploratory data analysis. Once you're happy that you've got the data into a condition where it can be analysed, fit a model and use that to try to answer the questions given below. For each dataset, your writeup should consist of a properly annotated R script that will allow me to exactly replicate your analysis, and the results section of a paper describing your findings. The latter should be no more than 800 words for exercises 3 and 4 (and can be a lot less...) and should not contain any unnecessary figures or tables. If in doubt have a look at some papers in (for example) Proceedings B or Molecular Ecology to see how it's done. Please don’t paste output from R directly into your report, by which I mean don’t just paste a summary table or an ANOVA table in, not that you shouldn’t use graphics from R.

Dataset 3: HIV viral load and within-patient population dynamics

Populations of the HIV virus are able to evade drug therapy and persist in certain immunoprotected tissues in the body, principally areas of the central nervous system (CNS) where CD4+ T-cells are prevented from entering. An HIV+ patient has enrolled in a study and consented to viral load sampling over 40 weeks in a year. Each week a sample was taken from the brain or spinal cord, and the viral population size ('load', here expressed as log10(number of viral particles per ml)) measured using a chip assay.  Average Shannon population diversity, and mean pairwise genetic distance from individual viruses present in each weekly sample to a reference sequence was assessed using single-copy PCR amplification of the viral Env sequence, and we hope to find some relationship between population size, diversity, evolutionary distance and tissue.
Do your best to fit a model explaining viral load in terms of the other variables, using any combination of variables you see fit, and any model selection procedure. Write up your results accordingly, with any figures which are appropriate for the research paper we plan to write. Since we're unsure how likely the host immune system is to penetrate the CNS, CD4+ cell counts in the patient's general circulation were assessed using flow cytometry, and categorized as 'low' or 'high' - you may wish to consider these in your analysis. The rows in the data table are in chronological order.

Dataset 4: Land use change in SE Asia

Researchers are interested in how hunting strategies used by insectivorous bats are influenced by land use change in South East Asia, which is now occurring at a dramatic pace due to the speed of economic development. The team captured bats flying over three different land use types: secondary rainforest (A), oil palm plantations (B), and urban ornamental gardens (C). They collect faeces from individual bats, extract DNA and amplify and sequence the COI mitochondrial gene. 
The data were demultiplexed, adapters removed, paired end reads merged and filtered to 300-330bp in length. OTUs were created by clustering at 99% similarity and OTU sequences were blasted against the NCBI databased with 90% percent identity requirement. Only OTUs which matched to the Insecta class were retained. These results were captured in a species x sample matrix. Samples are given as rows. You will be assisting the team by conducting a multivariate visualisation and analysis appropriate to this dataset to explore the effects of land use type on diet of bats. 
